# RHManagedObject

RHManagedObject is a library for iOS to simplify your life with Core Data.  It was motivated by the following:

- Core Data is verbose.  Have a look at [Listing 1](http://developer.apple.com/library/mac/#documentation/Cocoa/Conceptual/CoreData/Articles/cdFetching.html) from the Apple Documentation and you'll see it takes ~14 lines of code for a single fetch request.  `RHManagedObject` reduces this to one line of code.
- Core Data is not thread safe. If you wish to mutate your objects off the main thread you need to create a separate object context, attach a `NSManagedObjectContextDidSaveNotification` notification to it, and merge the context into an observer method on the main thread.  `RHManagedObject` does all of this for you so that you can simply work transparently with your objects in any thread.  
- Each managed object has an object context associated with it, and for some operations you must first fetch the object context in order to operate on the object. For example:

	``` objective-c
	NSManagedObjectContext *moc = [myManagedObject managedObjectContext];
	[moc deleteObject:myManagedObject];
	```

	This is more verbose than necessary since it introduces the object context when its existence is implied by the managed object. `RHManagedObject` replaces the above code with:

	``` objective-c
	[myManagedObject delete];
	```
	
	`RHManagedObject` hides the object context in a singleton such you never have to interact with it directly.  This approach also removes the need to pass the object context among each `UIViewController` that uses it.
- The generated managed object classes leave little room to add additional methods. You can't (or shouldn't) add extra methods to the generated classes since they will be overridden when the classes are regenerated. `RHManagedObject` provides a place for additional class and instance methods.
- The AppDelegate gets polluted with boilerplate code. `RHManagedObject` hides most of this, which also makes it easier to copy the library to other projects.

## How To Get Started

- [Download RHManagedObject](https://github.com/chriscdn/RHManagedObject/zipball/master)
- Copy `RHManagedObject.h`, `RHManagedObject.m`, `RHManagedObjectContextManager.h`, and `RHManagedObjectContextManager.m` into your project

## Overview

This brief overview assumes you have some experience with Core Data.

A typical Core Data "Employee" entity (say, with attributes firstName and lastName) has an inheritance hierarchy of:

	NSObject :: NSManagedObject :: EmployeeEntity

`RHManagedObject` changes this to:

	NSObject :: NSManagedObject :: RHManagedObject :: EmployeeEntity :: Employee
	
You'll notice that the `RHManagedObject` and `Employee` classes have been added to the hierarchy. The `RHManagedObject` class adds generic methods (i.e., not specific to your model) that simplifies interacting with Core Data. Its main features are:

- It manages the object context so that you don't have to think about it.
- It adds easier methods for fetching, creating, cloning, and deleting managed objects.
- It provides a simplified interface for saving the context, and works the same regardless from which thread it's called.

For example, the newEntity method introduced in `RHManagedObject` lets you create a new managed object with a single line:

``` objective-c
Employee *newEmployee = [Employee newEntity];
```

Fetching all employees with first name "John" is also a single line:

``` objective-c
NSArray *employees = [Employee fetchWithPredicate:[NSPredicate predicateWithFormat:@"firstName=%@", @"John"]];
```

The delete method lets you delete an existing managed object:

``` objective-c
[firedEmployee delete];
```

Changes can be saved with the commit method, which will handle all the nuances of creating and merging the contexts from different threads. In other words, you can call `commit` from your thread and forget about it:

``` objective-c
[Employee commit];
```

You'll notice that none of these examples require direct use of `NSManagedObjectContext`. That's handled for you within the library. Of course, a method is available to fetch the object context for the current thread if it's required:

``` objective-c
NSManagedObjectContext *moc = [RHManagedObject managedObjectContext];
```

The `EmployeeEntity` class is still generated by Xcode, but is manually edited to inherit from `RHManagedObjectClass` instead of `NSManagedObjectClass`. It's a small hack, but only means changing two lines of code. 

*Note:* The object graph must also be modified before and after the entity classes are generated.  Open your xcdatamodeld in XCode, click on your entity, and view the properties at the right.  The `Name` and `Class` fields must be set to your entity name when generating your `NSManagedObject` subclasses.  After they are generated you must set the `Class` to the name of your superclass.

For example, when generating the `EmployeeEntity` I set the name and class fields to `EmployeeEntity`.  After they are generated I set the class field to `Employee`.

If there is an easier way to do this then please let me know.

The `Employee` class requires two methods to identify which Core Data entity it extends and to which model it belongs. This is used by `RHManagedObjectContext`, and looks like this:

``` objective-c
+(NSString *)entityName {
    return @"EmployeeEntity";
}

// This returns the name of your xcdatamodeld model, without the extension
+(NSString *)modelName {
	return @"SimplifiedCoreDataExample";
}
```

However, it's also the place where additional methods can be added without disrupting the generated entity class. For example:

``` objective-c
-(NSString *)fullName {
    return [NSString stringWithFormat:@"%@ %@", self.firstName, self.lastName];
}
```

The library also contains a singleton class called `RHManagedObjectContextManager`, which contains the Core Data boilerplate code that's normally found in the AppDelegate. It also handles the managed object contexts among the different threads, and the merging of contexts when saving. You can probably ignore this class since it's only used internally by the library.

Lastly, the library also contains code to populate the store on first launch. This was motivated by the [CoreDataBooks example](http://developer.apple.com/library/ios/#samplecode/CoreDataBooks/Introduction/Intro.html), so all you have to do is copy the sqlite file generated by the simulator into your project. The library takes care of the rest.

## Example Usage

Once you have setup `RHManagedObject` it becomes much easier to do common tasks.  Here are some examples.

### Add a new employee

``` objective-c
Employee *employee = [Employee newEntity];
```

### Fetch all employees

``` objective-c
NSArray *allEmployees = [Employee fetchAll];
```

### Fetch all employees with first name "John"

``` objective-c
NSArray *employees = [Employee fetchWithPredicate:[NSPredicate predicateWithFormat:@"firstName=%@", @"John"]];
```

### Fetch all employees with first name "John" sorted by last name

``` objective-c
NSArray *employees = [Employee fetchWithPredicate:[NSPredicate predicateWithFormat:@"firstName=%@", @"John"] withSortDescriptor:[NSSortDescriptor sortDescriptorWithKey:@"lastName" ascending:YES]];
```

### Get a specific employee record

The `getWithPredicate:` method will return the first object if more than one is found.

``` objective-c
Employee *employee = [Employee getWithPredicate:[NSPredicate predicateWithFormat:@"employeID=%i", 12345]];
```

### Count total number of employees

``` objective-c
NSUInteger employeeCount = [Employee count];
```

### Count total number of employees with first name "John"

``` objective-c
NSUInteger employeeCount = [Employee countWithPredicate:[NSPredicate predicateWithFormat:@"firstName=%@", @"John"]];
```

### Get all the unique first names

``` objective-c
NSArray *uniqueFirstNames = [Employee distinctValuesForAttribute:@"firstName" withPredicate:nil];
```

### Get the average age of all employees

``` objective-c
NSNumber *averageAge = [Employee aggregateWithType:RHAggregateAverage key:@"age" predicate:nil defaultValue:nil];
```

### Fire all employees

``` objective-c
[Employee deleteAll];
```

### Fire a single employee

``` objective-c
Employee *employee = [Employee get ...];
[employee delete];
```

### Commit changes

This must be called in the same thread where the changes to your objects were made.

``` objective-c
[Employee commit];
```

### Completely destroy the Employee model (i.e., delete the .sqlite file)

This is useful to reset your Core Data store after making changes to your model.

``` objective-c
[Employee deleteStore];
```

### Get an instance of a object in another thread

Core Data doesn't allow you to pass managed objects among threads.  Here's how you can you fetch a valid managed object in different threads.

```
Employee *employee = [Employee getWithPredicate:[NSPredicate predicateWithFormat:@"employeID=%i", 12345]];

dispatch_async(dispatch_get_global_queue(DISPATCH_QUEUE_PRIORITY_DEFAULT, 0), ^{

	// employee is not valid in this thread, so we fetch one that is:
	Employee *employee2  = [employee objectInCurrentThreadContext];
	
	// do something with employee2
	
	[Employee commit];
});
```

## I'm stuck!

Check out the included `SimplifiedCoreDataExample` for a working example.  You can also contact me if you have any questions or comments.

## Where is this being used?

RHManagedObject is being used in

- [TrackMyTour](http://trackmytour.com/) - Travel Sharing for iPhone and iPad
- [Warmshowers.org](http://warmshowers.org/) - Hospitality for Touring Cyclists
- [PubQuest.com](http://pubquest.com/) - Not yet released

Contact me if you'd like your app to be listed.

## Contact

[Christopher Meyer](https://github.com/chriscdn)
[@chriscdn](http://twitter.com/chriscdn)
Follow 